+++
title = "On title case"
date = "2023-09-19"
+++

Natural language is full of rules, conventions, and idiosyncracies, which lend structure and predictability in the otherwise chaotic stream of expressed thoughts. This, in turn, makes communication between speakers easier, as each party more or less knows what to expect when it engages in a conversation. Thus, the utility of rules and conventions as a whole is evident—it is to facilitate communication. However, within any composite body, there are always individual elements that do not contribute to the overall purpose, and are, in a strict sense, useless, but are nevertheless carried along with the flow by their more productive relatives. Language is no different, and, as it develops, it naturally sheds overly contrived rules, unnecessarily complicated conventions, and outdated idiosyncracies.

A foolhardy attitude, therefore, is that of the pedant, who insists on linguistic rules as if they were natural law, and seeks no further justification for following and imposing a convention, other than the apparent fact that others before him have also followed the same convention. A somewhat mitigated but illustrative example of that attitude comes from the French *Académie française*, which is notorious for its inflexibility when it comes to changing the official French language. The broader consequences of this attitude are fascinating in themselves; it must be, at least in part, due to the French language having such an institution, that the language in Molière’s works is noticeably more similar to contemporary French than that of Shakespeare is to contemporary English.[^1]

On the opposite end are those that push the boundaries of what is commonly accepted and conventional. Poets, for example, have a long history of being at the forefront of language changes, either by willfully disregarding rules, or by directly promoting novel directions for writing. This is rarely their focus, of course, and usually comes about as a byproduct of the poet struggling to find expression. However, there are also examples of a more meditated approach to affecting change. William Wordsworth’s preface to the second edition of *Lyrical ballads*, in which he emhpasizes the need to use language that is “really used by men” in order to more accurately express powerful feelings, remains a read that is at least as fascinating today as it must have been at its time of publication in 1800. A more recent example of a similar theme can be seen in the work of E. E. Cummings, who is often credited with single-handedly murdering line conventions in English verse. While that is an exaggeration (poets had been breaking line conventions long before the 20<sup>th</sup> century), he seems to have dealt the definitive coup de grâce. 

Of course, as everywhere else, both sides are necessary. Unless the core intention of the *Academies françaises* is retained on some subconscious level, language would surely disintegrate into a post-tower-of-Babel-babble, impeding communication. Likewise, unless the E. E. Cummingses are there to ruthlessly stab an old convention in the back, language would surely stagnate and become boring if not useless. Following this need for balance, a reasonable practice of linguistic hygiene would be to identify those conventions which have become useless, or have simply outlived their purpose (if a purpose they ever had to begin with) and dispose of them surely and quietly. This already occurs in practice of course. Natural language evolves with time, without direction from prefaces, poems, or blog posts. Notwithstanding the natural cleansing processes, sometimes a more focused attention on a specific issue can be helpful.

To identify such an issue, and to (finally) come to the point, I propose to look at the practice of title case in the English language. Simply explained, this is the practice of capitalizing the first letter of most words when they appear in a title. The leading news article on the *New York Times*'s website at the moment of writing is *Ukraine Pushes South, but Faces Obstacles in Counteroffensive*. In that title, every word except “but” and “in” is capitalized, that is, it begins with an uppercase letter. This is a ridiculous practice that needs to be rooted out of the English language immediately and forgotten about immediately after. The remained of this post will be used to build a multi-threaded argument to support that assertion.

## Inconsistency

One problem with using title case is that there is no such thing as title case. Instead, there are many different and often contradicting styles of what a properly title cased piece of text should look like. Taking the *New York Times*'s headline as an example, the decision not to capitalize the first letters of the words “but” and “in” is explained in *The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage* by the following: 
>In cap-and-lowercase headlines, capitalize all nouns, pronouns and verbs, and all other words of four or more letters. Handle shorter words as follows:
>
>Capitalize — No, Nor, Not, Off, Out, So, Up 
>
>lowercase — a, and, as, at, but, by, en (in *en Route*) for, if, in, of, on, or, the, to, *v.* (in legal contexts), vs. via 
>Handle infinitives this way: *to Be; to Do; to Go.*
>
>In print, uppercase the first word of any line in a main headline, or in a bank inside the paper. V-shaped banks (inverted pyramids) on Page A1 are different: Treat them as if they were one continuous line, so the first word of the second or third line should be lowercased if it is in the lowercase list above. Uppercase any word directly after a dash in a bank. Uppercase any word directly after a colon in a headline. And always uppercase the last word of a headline or a bank.
>Some of the “little” headline prepositions occasionally turn into adverbs, modifying the preceding word; in those situations, they are capitalized: *Mayor Drops In; Meeting Drones On*. Sometimes even as a preposition, such a word will attach to the preceding verb, and should be uppercased: *Cared For by His Mother; Attended To in an Emergency Room*. But idioms like *Call on, Call for and Wait on*, when followed by objects, do not fall into that category, and the prepositions remain lowercase: *Mayor Calls on President to Yield; Senator Calls for Decision*. A few expressions can occur in both forms: *They Waited on Tables but Customers Were Waited On in Turn*.
>
>…[^2]

The purpose of a manual of style is to ensure consistency across the content produced using the same manual. Having contrived rules that do not bend to any reason runs counter to that purpose. In fact, using the magic of exact string matching, I was able to find many articles in the *New York Times* that were inconsistent with the manual of style. That is completely understandable; I could not in good conscience blame the authors and the editors for not stuffing their noses inside the manual of style for every word in every headline, on the off-chance that it might be an exception to a refinement to a preposterous rule. In practice, however, this means that using title case leads to *less* consistency across content using the same manual of style, which runs contrary to the purpose of having a manual of style in the first place. 

The inconsistency is compounded when considering contents produced under different manuals of style. The *New York Times* headline discussed above is incorrect according to the Associated Press style, which in its turn would be incorrect according to the Chicago style. In some other contexts, there is a single main convention, and while others may also exist alongside it, it is the de facto default one. That is not the case for manual of styles, where there is no convergence upon a single style. That is for a good reason. Manuals of styles are designed with their specific contexts in mind. For example, the Associated Press manual of style is specifically designed for journalism. Since space was an important consideration in printed newspapers, conventions like abbreviations, acronyms, and numerals were mandated in order to save space and make the text more concise. There is no reason, however, that a literary publisher should share the same concerns to the same extent, meaning that a slightly different manual of style might be more appropriate for that context. 

While in an ideal world, a single publication might ensure that every single title is title cased according to their own manual of style, thereby ensuring complete internal consistency, the consistency between different manuals of style is inevitable because it is there by design. Neither is striving towards a single style an acceptable solution, since language is used for many purposes, each of which has its own particular considerations and, therefore, its own style. In practice, then, the use of title case will always lead to inconsistency.

## Necessity

The capitalization of specific words is a deliberate act that carries semantic meaning. A brief, surface-level, comparative view of different languages can be instructive on this point. Most languages that do not use the Roman or the Cyrillic scripts do not have case differentiation. As such, the Chinese 李 looks the same whether it is at the start or at the end of a sentence; whether it is someone’s surname (Li) or whether it is used as a noun (plum). There is no uppercase 李 or lowercase 李, there is just 李. At first, this can be as disorienting to a Western speaker as case differentiation is to a Chinese one, but the difference is quickly overcome, and one hardly misses having to capitalize based on context. English, in contrast, makes liberal use of capitalization, using it for every word that is at the start of the sentence, as well as for proper nouns, days of the week, names of the month, honorifics, personal titles, and, of course, for god. Other European languages vary somewhat, but generally follow the same trend.[^3] 

Considering the types of speech that are capitalized in those languages in which there is such a thing as capitalization, we can quickly see the reasoning behind it—capitalization appears to be used for distinctive words—those that stand out in some way from the rest of the text, and those that are intended to show respect.[^4] Whether capitalization is necessary in all or any of these cases can be debated; East Asian languages do not appear to me to be less respectful for not having case distinctions. Nevertheless, a coherent argument can be made, even if it is not convincing. What is more important, however is that the capitalized words are constant and have the following characteristics—they are not random and they do not vary. Capitalized words always belong to some broader category, there are no words which are capitalized for no reason. You would not see the word Spider written as such, and if you do, it would take you by surprise with its conspicuity. Neither do capitalized words vary; you would never write somebody’s name in lowercase. 

None of these characteristics are true for the title case. In here, capitalized words are both random and free to vary depending on context. If you ask whether the word “in” should be capitalized, the answer you are looking for lies hidden under several conditionals. Does it appear in the title, or the subtitle? Are we talking about this style or that style? Does the word perform this or that grammatical function? Depending on how you answer any of those questions, you can expect a different result. There is no predictability, therefore, nothing is surprising. But most egregiously, there is no perceived reason behind the capitalization. The purported justification is that important words in titles are capitalized, and less important words are not. But this is wholly unconvincing. 

Consider the following title—*Japanese Scientist Develops Nuclear Weapon in South Korea*. Suppose we removed the “less important” word “in” from the title. Now the meaning is obscured. Did the scientist develop it *in* South Korea, or *for* South Korea? Or perhaps *against* South Korea? Those are all very different things. Indeed, you would rather lose any other word from that sentence before you’d give up “in”. Furthermore, if title case really was necessary to highlight the important words in a sentence, why not use it throughout the whole text, instead of just in the title? The answer is because its sole justification for existence is false, and it has no place in any text.

## Aesthetics

This argument is purely subjective but title case is hideous. It reminds me of hurdle tracks at the Olympics, where athletes have to jump over evenly-spaced obstacles without knocking them down. The sport is fun to watch, but I do not want to experience it every time I read an article. I feel liable to trip over some short preposition that happened to be capitalized without my expecting it. 

Title case looks completely unnatural and jarringly different than any other portion of text anywhere. There is, admittedly, visual benefit of having titles looking different than the rest of the text. However, title case is not the best way to achieve this. In fact, I cannot think of a *worse* way to accomplish that goal, other than making the title completely illegible. Using font properties, such as size, boldness, colors, and typesetting conventions, such as indentations and centering, are preferable and sufficient.  

## Difficulty

If adding inconsistency, being unnecessary, and looking ugly was not enough, title case also makes the process of writing more difficult. I already mentioned the proverbial *New York Times* editors with their noses in the manual, but they are not the only ones who suffer; at least they know which manual to use. Those unfortunate souls who submit documents, articles, essays, or practically any form of text which includes a title have the additional burden of having to find out which style the outlet has decided to use, and to make sure that their titles fall neatly in line. 

But we live, some would say, in the age of technology! Surely there must be a tool or a program that takes care of the dreaded title casing for us, if only we give it the right instructions. Not quite. Natural language processing is a thorny area, and given that some capitalization rules depend on grammatical role, existing tools are not consistently correct. In fact, quite the opposite from technology helping to streamline title casing, it is title casing that is getting in the way of some technological processes (see [truecasing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truecasing)).

Even *if* technology could take the manual labor out of title case, it would remain a wasted effort. The process of writing should be, to the maximum extent possible, concerned with the content, and not with useless meta-efforts. That is difficult enough without adding artificial hoops through which writers have to jump. 

## Conclusion

It is only proper that language should be purged of rules and conventions that have overstayed their welcome. At any point in time, there will be many candidates which need to be considered, and for most of those there will be arguments for and against. However, there will also inevitably be some low-hanging fruit, which can be disposed of with little consideration. Title case is the lowest of the low-hanging fruits and it needs to be plucked immediately, as it does not deserve to sully the tree of the English language. 

[^1]: Molière wrote several decades after Shakespeare, but the same comparison can be made with Pierre Corneille, who was a slightly closer contemporary of the Bard.
[^2]: The manual proceeds to list exceptions and refinements to its arbitrary rules for another page or so. Being so ridiculous and contrary to any reason, those explanations are effectively clutter, and I am not reproducing them fully here in the interest of cleanliness and propriety. For the student of linguistic madness, the full text can be found under the heading *Capitalization* in the 2015 edition of the *Manual*.
[^3]: Except German, which has deemed it necessary to capitalize every noun. In practice, a piece of German text looks very much title cased throughout, to add to its other sins. But for a proper dissection of the absurdities of the German language, I refer the reader to the excellent essay by Mark Twain *[The awful German language](https://faculty.georgetown.edu/jod/texts/twain.german.html)*—an apt title if there ever was one.
[^4]: The case of the capitalization of the personal pronoun I is a curious case which probably deserves its own blog post.